
Bones provide the structure for our bodies. The adult human skeleton is made up of 206 bones. These include the bones of the skull, spine (vertebrae), ribs, arms and legs. Bones are made of connective tissue reinforced with calcium and specialised bone cells. Most bones also contain bone marrow, where blood cells are made.

Bones work with muscles and joints to hold our body together and support freedom of movement. This is called the musculoskeletal system. The skeleton supports and shapes the body and protects delicate internal organs such as the brain, heart and lungs.

Bones contain most of our body’s calcium supply. The body is constantly building up and breaking down bone tissue as required. Healthy bone needs a balanced diet, regular weight-bearing exercise and the right levels of various hormones.


The human skeleton is made up of 206 bones, including bones of the:

Skull – including the jaw bone
Spine – cervical, thoracic and lumbar vertebrae, sacrum and tailbone (coccyx)
Chest – ribs and breastbone (sternum)
Arms – shoulder blade (scapula), collar bone (clavicle), humerus, radius and ulna
Hands – wrist bones (carpals), metacarpals and phalanges
Pelvis – hip bones
Legs – thigh bone (femur), kneecap (patella), shin bone (tibia) and fibula
Feet – tarsals, metatarsals and phalanges


There are four different types of bone in the human body:

Long bone – has a long, thin shape. Examples include the bones of the arms and legs (excluding the wrists, ankles and kneecaps). With the help of muscles, long bones work as levers to permit movement.
Short bone – has a squat, cubed shape. Examples include the bones that make up the wrists and the ankles.
Flat bone – has a flattened, broad surface. Examples include ribs, shoulder blades, breast bone and skull bones.
Irregular bone – has a shape that does not conform to the above three types. Examples include the bones of the spine (vertebrae).


The different layers of bone tissue include:

Periosteum – the dense, tough outer shell that contains blood vessels and nerves
Compact or dense tissue – the hard, smooth layer that protects the tissue within
Spongy or cancellous tissue – the porous, honeycombed material found inside most bones, which allows the bone to be strong yet lightweight
Bone marrow – the jelly-like substance found inside the cavities of some bones (including the pelvis) that produces blood cells.
